I think that our experiences that we had in
relating ourselves to the
schools of the state was very important. What do
you think before, say in the mid-50s, or up until
1960, what do you think was the general scholastic
impression of Texas A&M across the state? What did
the average counselor principal think A&M was? I
think that the average principal would say that
Texas A&M College is a good college. It has a good
reputation. But it is a military school and it does
emphasize agriculture and engineering. And I
think that would be about
it. I had an idea about...
Well, Haskell, my going to A&M was a very fortunate
thing for me. I think it happened in that instance,
and I doubt if it would happen again. I happened to
be into something that began to be a general
movement in the country. I thought, you know, if we
did so well with these counselors on this initial
book, handbook, why couldn't we bring counselors
in in small groups and let them be a part of it? My
whole philosophy was that you determine your
retention rate by what you do in terms of
understanding the student, the placement of the
student, the atmosphere in which they're
handled,
the characteristics of a good school. So I went
over to Buck Warris and I said, Buck, I need help.
And I told him what I would like to do. And Buck and I
agreed mutually that it was an excellent thing,
but it had to be well organized.
we decided to call it the President's Conference
for Scholars, I mean for,
President's Conference for Freshman Students.
When we had the earlier conference, it was the
President's Conference for Counselors. And we
thought that we would, this would be a conference
where the counselor would come, but we would not
embarrass them. They would observe and they would
have help in any other way. But we would make no
attempt to do anything that would appear that we
were trying to twist an arm or this sort of thing. So
we tied this in to this other movement that we
started out first. Now there's a long history to
this pastoral and it's documented in the,
I'm sure in other areas. We, well I took tests when I
came here in the fall of 1934. The old American
Council on Education Psychological Examination
was used in 1934 because I took it. And I kept the
records on it. But when I left the center,
and I was completely unaware of this, but Collison
had a big house cleaning up there one weekend. I
know. and destroyed all of the records. It's a
shame. Let's go back to the early 60s.
What do you recall about the beginnings of what we
would call the aspirations report and study that
would end up with many meaningful
recommendations? How did that get generated? Do
you know? How did that whole effort to have a
self-study?
I don't know, but from my viewpoint over in the
counseling center, I
think that we owe a great deal to the Association of
Farmer Students. These were the people that
emerged as leaders. these were the people that
could go back to Dallas or San Antonio and I
remember that Buck and I worked on this and and Buck
worked with the former students and you remember
we had two former students an older one and a
younger one at every high school in the state and
Haskell, that's awesome.
They would visit students. They would have some
recognition of counselors. They would visit with
counselors and say, we're here to help you. I'll
tell you what to do. We're here to help you. If you
have a student who needs help, give us a chance.
This thing got so effective that, as I understand
it, the university asked them to let up. I don't
remember the exact problem, but I
did feel in the counseling center that we began to
gain a lot of sophistication. I think our
relationship with the college board was a very
strategic need. Describe how that came about.
That came about because the The Association of
Two-Year Colleges, as I understand it, used to
meet on our campus every fall. And for some reason
we dropped the ball somewhere and it was picked up
by you-know-who. They
agreed that every two-year college in the state
would require one or both of the two major testing,
admission testing. The College Board and the
American College Testing Board. Now,
Mr. Heaton was courting the act. For some reason,
it got a Baptist 10 or something. I don't know. But
Dean Hubert, again, was one of those quiet workers
that
did the best thing for the university, I think. He
said, now, Austin, I want this done in a way I don't
have a lot of static. I said, all right, I'll do it.
So my job was to work out a way to have the faculty
make the decision of what the test would be. Which
test? And so here's the way I did it. I contact both
of them. I told them we would be happy for them to
come. and bring a representative or more and
explain to us what our program was and, I mean, what
their program was and how it would affect us. Well,
they did. I
was fortunate because the college board had sent
their top people
a very pleasant fellow, but he simply was not
effective in my opinion. But our choosing
the college board, Haskell was a very important
move for us because we needed to get some
descriptive statements about the college that
lent itself to quality. And the college board
represented quality and integrity. They were a
tremendous help to us. They sent many people down
here to, well, we even had, I put up the distress
flag it won't be history because I knew it was going
to be hard to handle.
They sent a young lady in her late 30's I'd say, one
of these sharpies from one of the eastern colleges
And
it was great. She handled Dr. Nance.
He wanted me to know. He probably wouldn't have
anything to do with it. Well, before she left, he
was. Can I digress and tell you? Oh, please do.
Please do. Anyway.
Well, the achievement testing was an integral
part of this.
I
think
that Dean Hubert was the first, but I think that Dr.
Calhoun had some strong ideas because I worked
with him on some of them. We chose the credit by
examination program would be much better if we had
a standardized measure than to have handmade.
Because I think in most instances, if it's
handmade, it has biases. Well, we... We developed
this verifying code for loan credit by
accumulation, used as kind of a model in lots of
places.
But that was for placement. But we were able to use
some of the achievement tests for admission in
other ways. like honors classes, things of that
nature. Well, we
were going to use the advanced placement test, and
we didn't realize the level of expectancy on those
tests. there are not many fives made.
We finally ended up with, I believe, three or
higher would get credit.
Now, this is a story about Dr. Nance. Dr. Nance, he
was still reluctant. He had his own place. So he,
here comes our young lady again. And she showed him
one of the tests. And boy, that thing was, it was
something else. Well, Dr. Nance, he looked it over
carefully. And he began to mellow quite a bit. But
he still, though, he wanted to give the test. He
said, fine. He said, now, I want a staff member to be
responsible to bring the test over to me, and I will
give them. And then he is to come back and get the
test after I've scored it. Well,
he would send a pencil sheet back with the names of
the students who failed. Well, they would always
say, this was when we were using his test. they
would all sign.
And then he would sign his name on the sheets or
official. Well, Elder Crow would come over and get
the test from him. Well, he brought him in, gave him
to Hilda, and Hilda turned to one of the extra girls
and said, type up. this list here, and we had a
little letter that we would mail and say, we thank
you for participating. And we worked on it so that
you couldn't tell from the letter the size and all,
whether you did or didn't, because they'd be
handed out to the student. Well, the next morning,
The phone rang early, and I answered
it at the center. And Dr. Nance said, early? I said,
yes, sir. He said, I want to speak to that son of a
bitch you have over there. I said, Dr. Nance,
you've got more than one. Which one were you
thinking about? And oh, boy, he just exploded. He
said, they sent me one of these letters saying I
couldn't even pass my own. That's good. I said, Dr.
Nance, I'm afraid a problem has arisen here
because the young lady that typed up the letters
saw your name and she didn't know you were a very
important person and she put you down. And he said,
well, you want to watch that? I said, yes, sir.
We'll be alert on that from now on. But he was a real
character. But I caught a lot of reading over that.
Haskell, I tell you, I felt like a counseling and
testing center. It should be a place where a
student can go and seek help. It should not be a
center that tries to run things. It's a service.
And y'all served the whole campus. We served,
well, President Rudder with his usual
positiveness. He said, Curly, I want you to help
any person who wants to attend this university. I
want you to help any person who's admitted and is a
student. And I want you to help any student that is
preparing to leave. I mean, is quitting. And I want
you to help any student who has graduated from here
and is having problems. I said, yes, sir. That's
what we will do. Well, the Counseling Center today
will not see a student if they are not fully
enrolled. See, they're thinking of money. I never
allowed that in to what we would do. And I had a civil
engineering gradually come down from Dallas. And
he said, I can't work in this framework. He said,
when they're going to build something, they tell
me to level it. And he said, they have these
beautiful trees and other landmarks. And it's not
necessary. But he said, I'm young. And I said,
well, why don't you do it the other way?
Instead of using your engineering, go around to
the out flank. Talk to some architects. And I'll
bet you'll find that some of them are large enough,
they want engineers on the staff. Well, he was
delighted, and sure enough, he got a job. But I
think President Lutter is right. Now, during
those years in the 60s, you worked with the
associate and assistant deans of each of the
colleges. Describe those individuals. Talk
about each one of them as people. Describe them.
Yes,
we had a little, we called it a new student week
committee.
I was chairman of that thing, and we got along fine.
We had a little problem during the Graff
administration, but other than that, This was a
good organization.
I tried to coordinate what colleges wanted to do
and I had this young man, Blakely, I think his name
was, that came back here. He bought into the
McDonald things. He was on the staff. He was on as
his staff. Blatchley. Blatchley. Ron Blatchley.
Fine young man. And he seemed kind of at ease, not at
ease. And I said, what is the question you really
have? He said, well, they told me I had better watch
myself with you. He said, you're pretty hard on us.
And I said, how are you doing? Oh, Ron said, oh,
fine. I said, well, you're not having much
trouble, are you? He said, no. I said, well, I am
very persistent in our recognizing and working
with each other on what your area is. But I have
nothing to do with saying you can do this or you
can't do this. Now, I had the
fiscal office. See, we had this thing finally to
the point that we'd have a meeting of parents, and
the fiscal office would send representatives to
answer questions. Well, the fellow who did that,
he was a check, and he's dead now. But he couldn't
make it, so he sent this tall fellow, Smith. And
about noon, the phone rang and this major over in
ROTC, he was at the same meeting, he said, you've
got to fire that son of a bitch. He said he got the
audience so upset that one man got up to come up
there.
I said, this fellow later worked in the
restaurant.
I called and told them, oh, there's a check. I said,
you must not
have him back. We're not here for that. We are here
to serve as people that are glad to help.
Well, now all these
members of this. Yeah, these associate assistant
deans. New student committee. But now, we had not
only the associate dean, but we had people from the
registrar's office. Even Dollar got in on it.
Let's see. Now, Dr. Ransdell was the person
that... Now, Mike... Oh, the other one that was in
engineering. He's from my part of the country.
He's dead. But Dr. Ransdell was, of course, a
well-read person in this area because he was in on
the very beginning of it and... He was always
prepared. Dr. Potts was the dynamo. Let's go.
That's what's holding us up. That's R.C. Potts in
agriculture. Yes. R.C. Potts told me one time, he
said, Austin, you make me sick. He said... You run
around here, and if things aren't working, you
work on it. And he said, that's not the way you do it.
He said, what you do is, if they want to goof off, let
them goof off. And then it'll get so bad that
they'll say, we got to do something. And then they
will respond. I said, well, now, Richard, we've
got a lot of students here. And they're having to
pay for someone to learn the hard way. And I don't
want that. The old sergeant from Beck Medicine,
Mac Murray, he was in that famous march in Burma. He
was very blunt, very pragmatic, but you could tell
on him. And he always made meetings.
Geology and science. Yeah. Well, no, John Beckham
was in science. And now John, John was a great man.
Great man. Gifted.
His booming voice I can hear thinking about it.
Business? Business. We had this fellow that
he was a pilot for World War II. Tall. But now he was
very capable. He lacked experience, but he, Lowe,
Dan Lowe, Dan Lowe. And the architecture,
architecture, they were very intrigued with all
this, but they had a little difficulty finding out
where they, where they were. One time I had the
dean, say, Olsen, what am I supposed to say? And I
said, well, just tell them that you welcomed me out
to the campus, where you are, and you'll be glad to
help. It was a group of every one of them. We didn't
have a salary. Let's see, we didn't do liberal
arts. In the liberal arts, let's see. You know,
these fellows played roles and... Schlesselman
and then... Yeah, Schlesselman. Then
McCandless. McCandless. I think it was
McCandless. They, well you know McCandless had
done a dozen things.
It was a very congenial group we worked for. What
about the man who ran the registrar's office for a
few years named Heaton? Describe Mr. Heaton and
working with him. Mr. Heaton was, to me, was an old
time. He was a man who had developed a certain
procedure at work. And he was not far changed. As a
matter of fact, when I introduced the concept of
the student being able to pay their fees while
they're here. Mr. Heaton says it's against the
law.
And in some respects I felt for him because It must
have been many uncomfortable moments for him
because Haskell
was getting away from it. And it would have been
better if he had, Haskell, I just could not handle
those two jobs. I know I was supposed to have gone
over there and cleaned that up, but I just
honestly, well I was, my health was
deteriorating.
And I know the last time I met with the president,
he asked me if a certain plan was in agreement. And I
said, well, Mr. Heaton has agreed. He said, I
didn't ask Mr. Heaton, I asked you. Well, you see, I
felt like it.